%!TEX program = xelatex
\documentclass[11pt,article,oneside]{memoir}
\usepackage{org-preamble-xelatex}
\DisemulatePackage{setspace}
\usepackage{setspace}
\usepackage{titling}
\setlength{\droptitle}{-12em}
% \input{vc}


\usepackage{graphicx}
% We will generate all images so they have a width \maxwidth. This means
% that they will get their normal width if they fit onto the page, but
% are scaled down if they would overflow the margins.
\makeatletter
\def\maxwidth{\ifdim\Gin@nat@width>\linewidth\linewidth
\else\Gin@nat@width\fi}
\makeatother
\let\Oldincludegraphics\includegraphics
\renewcommand{\includegraphics}[1]{\Oldincludegraphics[width=\maxwidth]{#1}}

\title{The Early Spread of Mass Media Increases the Probability of Civil War: A
Research Note}

%\author{}

\author{\Large Justin Murphy\vspace{0.05in} \newline\normalsize\emph{University of Southampton} \newline\footnotesize \url{j.murphy@soton.ac.uk}\vspace*{0.2in}\newline }

%\author{Justin Murphy (University of Southampton)}

\date{}


\begin{document}  
\setkeys{Gin}{width=1\textwidth} 	
\setromanfont[Mapping=tex-text,Numbers=OldStyle]{Georgia} 
\setsansfont[Mapping=tex-text]{Gill Sans} 
\setmonofont[Mapping=tex-text,Scale=0.8]{Consolas}
\chapterstyle{article-jmrphy}
\pagestyle{kjh}

\singlespacing


\maketitle



\vspace{-4ex}
\begin{abstract}

\noindent A recent article in \emph{International Organization} suggests that by
enhancing the soft power of states, the spread of mass media decreases
the probability of civil war onset. This research note contributes a
crucial correction to the logic of that argument (internal consistency)
and demonstrates a substantively different and improved accounting of
the empirical relationship between mass media and civil war (internal
and external validity).

\end{abstract}

\newpage


\onehalfspacing

In a recent issue of \emph{International Organization}, Camber Warren
argues that the spread of mass media technologies throughout a
particular country decreases the probability of observing civil war
because, other things equal, mass media technologies increase state
strength and therefore deter insurgencies. The reason that technologies
such as televisions, radios, and newspapers enhance the state's strength
is because they increase the state's normative influence and therefore
its power to induce loyalty from citizens. More specifically, mass media
technologies increase this ``soft power'' of the state in two ways.
First, mass media technologies lower the costs of communication in
general, for states as well as insurgents. Second, however,mass media
technologies increase the normative influence of the state in particular
because of economies of scale which are unique to the production of
normative influence. Because a media message achieves a larger effect on
receivers who believe the message was widely disseminated, the
production of normative influence through mass media brings increasing
marginal returns for each additional unit of effort, as each additional
recipient receiving the message increases the effect of the message on
the rest of the receivers. Because the state is inherently a
larger-scale producer of symbolic content than potential insurgent
groups, Warren argues, higher levels of mass media will be associated
with normatively stronger states and therefore lower probabilities of
observing civil war. Grounding this theoretical model in the tradition
of figures such as Karl Deutsche and Benedict Anderson who first
diagnosed the role of mass media in the rise of modern nationalism, as
well as contemporary experimental research on mass-media messaging,
Warren's theory stresses the unique effects of mass communications
relative to small-scale interpersonal communications. Using state-level
data for a large panel of countries from 1945 to 1999, Warren
demonstrates that, after controlling for other predictors of civil war,
mass media density (televisions, radios, and newspapers per person) is
associated with more than a tenfold decrease in the likelihood of
observing civil war in a particular country-year.

But if higher levels of mass media density decrease the likelihood of
civil war, it is extremely puzzling that in modern history, the
international system's most rapid and widespread proliferation of mass
media density has coincided with its most dramatic increases in civil
war. If mass media density decreases the likelihood of civil war as
strongly and robustly as Warren argues, then why has the global
proliferation of mass media since 1945 had no appreciable effect in
pacifying the global prevalence of civil war?

\begin{figure}[htbp]
\centering
\includegraphics{figure/globalplot.pdf}
\caption{plot of chunk globalplot}
\end{figure}

While Warren's article is an original and important study which presents
numerous and convincing robustness checks for its main finding, the
internal consistency of the argument suffers from two crucial
oversights. First, while there are increasing marginal returns to the
production of normative influence in the context of \emph{mass
communications,} there is not a linear, one-to-one relationship between
a country's mass media density and its capacity for mass communications,
as implied by Warren's theory and measurements. When only a very small
proportion of the population has access to mass media technologies, the
mere presence of some of those technologies does not imply the presence
of a mass communications system at merely low levels; it reflects a
country which still categorically lacks the infrastructural capacity for
properly mass communications.\footnote{Of course, there is no way to
  know \emph{a priori} how many people need access to mass media
  technologies before they constitute a mass public network and
  therefore the categorical presence of a mass communications system. In
  any event, the question is pursued empirically below. At this stage,
  it suffices simply to note the contention that very low levels of mass
  media density do not reflect the positive presence of a mass
  communications capacity.} If only a very small proportion of a
population has access to television, radio, or a newspaper, recipients
of mass media messaging will know that the vast majority of others will
not be affected by the message. Thus, within the subset of countries
characterized by very low levels of media density, the normative
influence of messages delivered by mass media technologies should not be
enhanced by increasing marginal returns as these are contingent on the
recipient believing the message to be \emph{widely} spread. Rather, mass
media density only captures the reach of mass communications within a
country after mass media technologies become sufficiently widespread to
effectively consititute a mass public network.\footnote{I assume
  throughout that mass media typically first appears within countries at
  very low levels relative to the population (low media density). I also
  assume throughout that, despite variable rates of change and short-run
  decreases, media density has a long-run tendency to increase. In other
  words, I assume that the dynamics of media density are non-stationary
  and trend upward. The Levin-Lin-Chu (2002) and Im-Pesaran-Shin (2003)
  tests for stationarity in panel data fail to reject the null
  hypothesis that media density is non-stationary (p = 0.7473 and p =
  0.1, respectively). See the Appendix for details.}

Second, if the level of mass media \emph{in general} increases state
strength as Warren argues, then for this very reason, the \emph{first
appearance and early growth} of mass media within a country should
increase the utility of controlling the state relative to other means of
merely influencing it. Especially given that mass media density is
non-stationary and trends upward in every country in which it has been
introduced, the first appearance of mass media technology should
increase the incentives of opposition groups to risk insurgency before
the development of a mass communications system significantly increases
the power of the incumbent and decreaes the power of opposition groups
outside the state. Additionally, the closer a country's mass media
density is to the threshold at which it will constitute a capacity for
mass communcations, the more attractive it will be for opposition groups
outside the state to gain control of the state. First, it is
increasingly urgent as the state becomes nearer to consolidating its
normative domination via mass communications and therefore significantly
less vulnerable to insurgency, and second, the closer the country is to
the threshold the less time will a successful insurgency be vulnerable
to yet another insurgency before it consolidates its own normative
consolidation via mass communications. Thus, if it is true that
increasing mass media density makes state power increasingly safe from
insurgency, then before media density crosses the threshold of
constituting mass communications power, \emph{each increase} in mass
media density should further increase the payoffs to violent insurgency.

Thus, this research note advances a different theory of the relationship
between mass media technology and civil war. Specifically, the
\emph{introduction and early growth} of mass media density within a
country should \emph{increase} rather than decrease the likelihood of
civil war. Precisely because a capacity for mass communications
increases state power and becomes a robust deterrent against insurgents,
but low levels of mass media density do not yet constitute that power,
year-to-year increases in mass media density up to a certain threshold
should be positively associated with civil war onset.\footnote{It stands
  to reason that the same logic characterizes the incentives of
  incumbents, as each increase in mass media density up to that
  threshold also increases the utility of defeating insurgencies
  relative to stepping down or sharing power, thus further predicting
  civil war onsets. Yet the calculus of incumbents is likely more
  complicated given that under certain conditions it could be preferable
  to share the state's new mass communications power rather than risk
  losing it. At present, I focus on the calculus of insurgents and leave
  the calculus of incumbents to future research.} It is only beyond that
threshold that Warren's finding of a negative relationship between mass
media density and civil war should hold.

To test whether this theory explains the empirical record better than
Warren's highly parsimonious theory, I pursue a strategy of increasing
causal leverage relative to the original analyses (King, Keohane, and
Verba 1994, 30). First, I deduce different and more numerous observable
implications for my theory, which provide more numerous opportunities
for falsification. Second, I increase data-set observations by extending
the original sample.(Brady and Collier 2010, 184; King, Keohane, and
Verba 1994, 30).

\%\%\%\% Front-load emmpirical findings here

\%\%\%\% Sketch importance and implications here

\%\%\%\% Outline the rest of the article here

\section{Review Warren, situated by Deutsche and
Anderson}\label{review-warren-situated-by-deutsche-and-anderson}

\section{Theory}\label{theory}

\begin{itemize}
\itemsep1pt\parskip0pt\parsep0pt
\item
  observable implication 1: differenced mdi in lowest subset
  --\textgreater{} civil war
\item
  observable implication 2: tv and newspapers larger effect in lowest
  subset
\item
  observable implication 3: civil war more likely after 1945 than before
\end{itemize}

\section{Analysis}\label{analysis}

\begin{figure}[htbp]
\centering
\includegraphics{figure/violinplot.pdf}
\caption{Violin plot of media density for all civil war onsets}
\end{figure}

\begin{table}[!htbp] \centering 
  \caption{Early Growth of Media Density Compared to Media Density in General} 
  \label{} 
\footnotesize 
\begin{tabular}{@{\extracolsep{5pt}}lccc} 
\\[-1.8ex]\hline \\[-1.8ex] 
\\[-1.8ex] & \multicolumn{3}{c}{onset} \\ 
\\[-1.8ex] & (1) & (2) & (3)\\ 
\hline \\[-1.8ex] 
 mdi & $-$0.03$^{***}$ &  &  \\ 
  & (0.01) &  &  \\ 
  ld.mdi &  & 0.51$^{**}$ &  \\ 
  &  & (0.26) &  \\ 
  ld.news &  &  & 1.44$^{*}$ \\ 
  &  &  & (0.75) \\ 
  ld.radio &  &  & 0.27 \\ 
  &  &  & (0.31) \\ 
  ld.tv &  &  & 2.10$^{*}$ \\ 
  &  &  & (1.22) \\ 
  lgdpl & $-$0.04 & $-$0.49 & $-$0.49 \\ 
  & (0.17) & (0.32) & (0.31) \\ 
  larea & $-$0.09 & 0.01 & 0.001 \\ 
  & (0.09) & (0.15) & (0.15) \\ 
  lmtn & 0.11$^{*}$ & 0.12 & 0.11 \\ 
  & (0.06) & (0.09) & (0.09) \\ 
  lpopl & 0.27$^{***}$ & 0.28$^{**}$ & 0.28$^{**}$ \\ 
  & (0.09) & (0.13) & (0.13) \\ 
  oil2l & 0.76$^{***}$ & 1.12$^{**}$ & 1.16$^{**}$ \\ 
  & (0.28) & (0.47) & (0.48) \\ 
  deml & 0.18$^{**}$ & 0.24$^{*}$ & 0.23$^{*}$ \\ 
  & (0.08) & (0.12) & (0.12) \\ 
  deml2 & $-$0.01$^{**}$ & $-$0.01 & $-$0.01 \\ 
  & (0.003) & (0.01) & (0.01) \\ 
  ethfracl & 0.20 & $-$0.73 & $-$0.59 \\ 
  & (0.37) & (0.54) & (0.55) \\ 
  relfracl & 1.38$^{***}$ & 1.27 & 1.38$^{*}$ \\ 
  & (0.52) & (0.79) & (0.79) \\ 
  pcyrs & $-$0.06 & $-$0.10 & $-$0.10 \\ 
  & (0.09) & (0.12) & (0.12) \\ 
  spline1 & $-$0.0001 & $-$0.001 & $-$0.002 \\ 
  & (0.002) & (0.003) & (0.003) \\ 
  spline2 & $-$0.0002 & 0.0003 & 0.0004 \\ 
  & (0.001) & (0.001) & (0.001) \\ 
  spline3 & 0.0001 & 0.0000 & $-$0.0000 \\ 
  & (0.0002) & (0.0003) & (0.0003) \\ 
  Constant & $-$8.35$^{***}$ & $-$9.59$^{***}$ & $-$9.65$^{***}$ \\ 
  & (1.18) & (1.77) & (1.80) \\ 
 N & 5,899 & 1,672 & 1,672 \\ 
Log Likelihood & $-$527.50 & $-$219.80 & $-$218.40 \\ 
AIC & 1,085.00 & 469.60 & 470.70 \\ 
\hline \\[-1.8ex] 
\multicolumn{4}{l}{$^{*}$p $<$ .1; $^{**}$p $<$ .05; $^{***}$p $<$ .01} \\ 
\end{tabular} 
\end{table}

\begin{figure}[htbp]
\centering
\includegraphics{figure/full_panel_plot.pdf}
\caption{Disaggregated media density and all civil war onsets over time,
by country}
\end{figure}

\section{Conclusion}\label{conclusion}

\section{Appendix}\label{appendix}

The Levin-Lin-Chu statistic is a standard test for the presence of a
unit root, otherwise known as non-stationarity or integration of order
I(1), in a time series variable observed across multiple cross-sectional
units. The Im-Pesaran-Shin test is a ``second generation'' test which is
robust to cross-sectional dependence, common in cross-national panel
data. For each test, the null hypothesis is the presence of a unit root.
Because the tests require balanced panels, they were applied only to the
24 countries with the maximum time-series of 55 years, a subset which
still contains significant variation in geography, income, regime type,
and other factors. Specifically, the countries in this subset are:
Canada, Cuba, Haiti, Dominican Republic, Mexico, Honduras, El Salvador,
Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Uruguay, Ireland, Netherlands, Belgium,
Luxembourg, France, Switzerland, Hungary, Romania, Finland, Sweden,
Norway, Denmark, Afghanistan, China.

\begin{verbatim}
Levin-Lin-Chu Unit-Root Test (ex. var. : Individual Intercepts
and Trend )
\end{verbatim}

data: unit\$mdi z.x1 = -0.3222, p-value = 0.7473 alternative hypothesis:
stationarity

\begin{verbatim}
Pesaran's CIPS test for unit roots
\end{verbatim}

data: unit\$mdi CIPS test = -2.064, lag order = 2, p-value = 0.1
alternative hypothesis: Stationarity

\pagebreak   

\section*{References}\label{references}
\addcontentsline{toc}{section}{References}

\setlength{\parindent}{-0.2in} \setlength{\leftskip}{0.2in}
\setlength{\parskip}{8pt} \vspace*{-0.2in} \noindent

Brady, Henry E, and David Collier. 2010. \emph{Rethinking Social
Inquiry: Diverse Tools, Shared Standards}. Lanham: Rowman \&
Littlefield. \url{http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=djovjEXZYccC}.

Im, Kyung So, M Hashem Pesaran, and Yongcheol Shin. 2003. ``Testing for
Unit Roots in Heterogeneous Panels.'' \emph{Journal of Econometrics}
115(1): 53--74.
\url{http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0304407603000927}.

King, G, R O Keohane, and S Verba. 1994. \emph{Designing Social Inquiry:
Scientific Inference in Qualitative Research}. Princeton University
Press. \url{http://books.google.com/books?id=A7VFF-JR3b8C}.

Levin, Andrew, Chien-Fu Lin, and Chia-Shang James Chu. 2002. ``Unit Root
Tests in Panel Data: Asymptotic and Finite-Sample Properties.''
\emph{Journal of Econometrics} 108(1): 1--24.
\url{http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0304407601000987}.


\end{document}